---
layout: post_page
title: Dorothy Hodgkin, a life
abstract: You see how it is not the circumstances but the people themselves that matter. For me the thrill of scientific discovery was the most enjoyable and the ability of great people to stand tall through trying times, the ability to be disillusioned even about achieving a target very satisfying, inspiring and educating.
author: Georgina Ferry
---

*Language:* Enjoyably rich and not overly pompous like some; Style: It discusses almost everything in reasonable detail, even things I wouldn't care so much about. The part about scientific discovery and struggling through hardship were also very well described so it was fun.


*Impression (long):* Dorothy, as per the book of course, was a perfectionist when it came to science. Indications of this were present from the start. She always wanted to understand things properly and could not just following the rules. Once she was upset and obsessing over her homework. At being told by her mother that it must be correct she snapped "of course it's right, I just don't know why!". She usually had to take care of her siblings as her parents were very often away. She never complained. She worked very hard to get into Oxford. She would work so hard at Oxford that her room mate would be concerned and took it upon herself to take care of her at extremely stressful times. I think she even published a nature about her work done at the time. (I will not be chronological because then it will become too long.) She was not given a permanent position until very late and by that I mean even after she had become globally renouned. She worked on finding the structure of B<sub>12</sub>. The structure of penicillin was also worked on by her. There was a time in her life when almost all of her friends were getting the Nobel. Once she was confused with a cousin with a very similar name for having won it. She thought eventually that her chance was gone. She of course in the end did win it, and she won the full prize unshared. That only made her more fierce in her pursuit. Her laboratory wasn't quite known for its organisation. The atmosphere was very formal. She never asked anyone to work but would only come around and ask questions provoking thought and excitement. When they were trying to find the structure of insulin, something that everyone in her lab was starting to believe was impossible, once she came hovering around and humming a song which the book seems to suggest was popular and very motivating. Her belief that insulin was solvable is what kept everyone going. She was very concerned with global peace as well. She worked hard in getting interesting people to come (back sometimes) to England. She encouraged foreigners to come to her lab and encouraged them to go back and spread their skills in their home country. The book also discusses how China had independently figured the structure of insulin. In fact it must be mentioned that even though her group had solved insulin, and reading this part in the book gave me goosebumps, she was not satisfied with the resolution. She eventually with another colleague figured the structure precisely down to every water molecule (in the crystal?) while others thought she was crazy. She also never took very strong idealogical positions apparently and spoke about different countries by referring to the people in them. She also never wavered her attention much from science. In fact a typical dinner at the Hodgkin household was described as Thomas (her husband) entertaining the guests and then falling asleep in his chair while Dorothy would have a structure in her mind. I was saddened to learn that towards the end Thomas had an affair (perhaps more in the past) and Dorothy's views on them were not entirely clear as she seldom discussed her personal feelings. Thomas was even considering leaving Dorothy and had written a book which he dedicated to this other lady. Still she loved Thomas and spoke about him when asked to speak about close friendships at some dinner I believe. All this to say that she had her share of troubles and her share of luck. What made her her was her untouchable determination and the ability to see through people's exterior into their beautiful interior. There's a lot that can and must be said but let me close the way the book closes: 

“There was a magic about her person. She had no enemies, not even among those whose scientific theories she demolished or whose political views she opposed. Just as her X - ray cameras bared the intrinsic beauty beneath the rough surface of things, so the warmth and gentleness of her approach to people uncovered in everyone, even the most hardened scientific crook, some hidden kernel of goodness. It was marvellous to have her drop in on you in your lab, like the Spring. Dorothy will be remembered as a great chemist, a saintly, tolerant and gentle lover of people and a devoted protagonist of peace.”

Ferry, Georgina. Dorothy Hodgkin: A Life (Bloomsbury Reader) (pp. 493-494). Bloomsbury Publishing. Kindle Edition. 