---
layout: post_page
title: Of Mice and Men
abstract: Fiction. Short.
author: John Steinbeck
---

*Language*: Most dialogues are written to additionally convey the accent used. I did not find that very helpful. Otherwise, of course, well written.

*Impression (long)*: A story about two friends. It is well written, almost as a play with different chapters essentially acting as single scenes. The story itself, however, I did not quite like. The first friend (I still don't remember his name, damn it) is the relatively smart one. The second is good at heart, big (and strong) but stupid, forgetful (stop looking at me) and inadvertently ends up causing trouble. 

The book does a good job at painting this picture and making the reader get attached with the characters. It also keeps developing the story in a way that the reader stays hooked. For instance (spoiler alert) in the beginning the characters are evidently escaping something but it is only later that we learn what and why. 

Returning to the story, the short fellow doesn't seem to be sure if he wants to take care of the big fellow but this sentiment seems to only be on the surface. Their characters are developed a little through the description of the dinner scene. The main quirk of the big guy is that he likes to pet things, so much so that he would even pet a dead mouse if he is unable to find something else. This is what got them in trouble in the first place (he was petting a woman's cloth; when she realised and tried to retract it, he panicked and held it even more tightly; the woman reported he tried to rape him.) and it is this that leads to the end of the story. We learn more about them as the story progresses. In particular, the Big guy is repeatedly told (by the smart guy) to never open his mouth and let the smart guy do the talking. Further, the smart guy explains to the big fellow, precisely what to do in case he, the big fellow, gets himself into some trouble. Comically enough, the big guy repeatedly forgets this and the smart guy has to keep reminding him. The one important thing they discuss here is their dream plan—save enough money to be able to buy this piece of land that the smart fellow knows through his connections and live their lives at their terms. There is also this theme of friendship: most people like them, who work on the fields of other men, do it solo but the big and the smart fellow take pride in being together. They don't waste their money on prostitutes. They have a plan. 

They finally reach their destination—a safe location where nobody knows why they had to flee and where they can work a few days. Here most people seem nice, but there is this son of the boss that seems to immediately have a problem with the big guy. The smart guy tries to take control of the situation but the big guy mumbles something that partially betrays his stupidity/reason for fleeing. Nothing happens just yet but the smart guy has a bad feeling about this (TODO: there's a word to express this sentiment). 